Text S2. Random forest and extreme gradient boosting tree

Ensemble learning completes the learning task by building multiple base learners. Among them, the base learners are built using the decision tree algorithm. The inference rules based on the leaf nodes of the decision tree can achieve classification or regression prediction for new data. Regression trees mainly refer to the CART algorithm, which is a binary tree that uses a recursive binary split strategy to divide the regions [3].

Random forest (RF) is an ensemble learning algorithm based on the bagging idea. The final output of the model is determined by the prediction results of multiple independent decision trees (Fig. S9). Each decision tree model is trained independently from the original data by random sampling, including random sampling of the samples and features. This allows the model to have a small generalization error and significantly reduce the variance in prediction. It generally has high accuracy and generalization ability [4, 5].

Extreme gradient boosting tree (XGBoost) is an improved algorithm based on gradient boosting decision framework and is one of the popular ensemble learning algorithms [6]. Boosting is a forward-stagewise additive modeling technique, characterized by the continuous entry of model members into a joint prediction queue during the iteration process. The parameters and weights of the models that entered the joint prediction queue earlier are unaffected by subsequent models entering the queue, and at each iteration, only the parameters and weights of the current model need to be estimated (Fig. S10). XGBoost optimizes the cost function by performing a second-order Taylor expansion, considering both first- and second-order derivatives. It incorporates a regularization term to manage model complexity, which includes the number of leaf nodes in the tree and the square of the L2 norm of the output score on each leaf node. This regularization term reduces model variance, leading to a simpler learned model and preventing overfitting [7].

Based on the discussion above, it can be concluded that Bagging is effective in reducing variance and alleviating overfitting issues. On the other hand, Boosting is effective in reducing bias and alleviating underfitting problems. Therefore, when the base learners are prone to overfitting, Bagging-based random forests can effectively avoid overfitting issues, while the Boosting may exacerbate them. Conversely, if the base learners' performance is weak, Bagging cannot improve the overall performance of the ensemble model. However, XGBoost, which is based on Boosting, can enhance the overall predictive accuracy of the model.